======================================
EPAM Python Software Engineer Training
======================================

***********************
Lesson 2: Python basics
***********************

.. meta::
    :keywords: basics, module, package, function, class, object, interpreter
    :description: Learn Python basics: modules structure, object model

.. contents::

.. sectnum::

Course
======

Python interpreter
------------------
Python can run in two modes: `interpreter` and `program`.  Without arguments
python is running in `interpreter` mode where one can pass any python commands
interactively one-by-one.  If some file or module is given as an argument python
runs in `program` mode when it tries to execute module contents.  An
`interactive` mode is very useful for testing purposes when one wants to try a
code snapshot quickly.

Modules and packages
--------------------
A python project consists of one or more modules.  Each python module is simply
a file with ``.py`` extension containing python code.  During execution each
file is JIT-compiled into a ``.pyc`` file containing a byte-code that is being
executed by an interpreter.  For large projects it sometimes makes sense to
pre-compile all modules.  To find a module python is looking for the following
files in directories listed in `PYTHONPATH`: ``.so``, ``.pyc``, ``.py``.  If a
``.py`` file is absent - a ``.pyc`` file is used.  If both ``.pyc`` and ``.py``
files are present - a ``.pyc`` file might be regenerated based on a timestamp.

In case if a number of modules become large it makes sense to group them into
packages.  Python interpreter uses a naive directory structure for packaging.
Each package is simply a directory containing a special file ``__init__.py`` and
modules or other directories.  Each module in that directory will be a member of
that package.  An ``__init__.py`` is a python module itself, however, there are
rare cases when it contains any source code.

A module that is a start point for an application (the one that is passed as an
argument into a python program) has a special name ``__main__``.  It is
recommended to wrap all code that shall be executed at application start into
this code block:

.. code-block:: Python

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        # Here and application code goes.

Imports
-------
In python there are 3 kinds of imports:

    - absolute (**import package.module**);

    - from-import (**from package import module**,
      **from package.module import attribute1, attribute2**);

    - relative (**from . import module**, **from .module import attribute1**);

During an import python interpreter searches for a module specified inside
import statement and loads its contents.  By default python searches for modules
in all directories specified in ``PYTHONPATH``.  However, it is possible to
configure it to import files from anywhere (e.g. zip archive, database, network
share, or RESTful web service, or even build them on the fly).  All those
techniques are not part of a training course.

Functions
---------
Python is multi-paradigm language and a functional programming is one of its
paradigms.  Hence, every code instruction in python is a function call, even a
class declaration.  The simplest function is ``def foo(): pass``.  Each function
returns something, by default it returns a ``None`` object.  Function arguments
can be positional and named.  There are special arguments ``*args`` and
``**kwargs`` which allow a function to accept an arbitrary number of positional
or named arguments accordingly.

All function arguments in python are passed by reference; the same applies to a
function result.  No implicit data coying appear during a function call.

Classes
-------
In python there are `old-style` (until version ``3.0``) and `new-style` classes
(since version ``2.2``).  All modern applications use `new-style` classes that
must be derived from ``object``.  The simplest `new-style` class is
``class A(object): pass``.

In python everything is an object, hence, an instance of some class.  Even a
module, a function and a class itself are objects.  Hence, they can be
subclassed, created, and otherwise operated like objects.

Functions that are declared inside a class are methods.  There are several kinds
of methods: `instance methods`, `class methods`, and `static methods`.  Each
instance method accepts a class instance as the first attribute;  each class
method accepts a class as the first attribute.  Instance and class methods can
be called on both classes and class instances, while static methods can be
called on classes only.

Instance methods can be either `bound` or `unbound`.  Bound methods are those of
a specific class instance and unbound methods belong to a class, not an
instance.  For example, consider the below code:

.. code-block:: Python

    class A(object):

        def method(self):
            pass

        @classmethod
        def class_method(cls):
            return cls()

        @staticmethod
        def static_method():
            pass

	a = A()

    a.method()
    A.method(a)

In both cases above the same method is called with the same arguments.

Each class in python has a special instance method ``__init__`` that is called
instance initializer and is called right after an class instance was created.
All arguments that are passed to a class constructor appear as arguments in that
method.

Tasks
=====

Packages
--------
Create a package for this lesson.  Create a module in it which prints ``Hello
World`` and a current time.

Starting with this course each lesson shall be a separate package and each task
shall be a separate module in it with the following naming convention:
``lesson02.task01``.

Every module shall have its own meaningful doc-string and each public member of
a module shall have a proper doc-string as well.  A `lower_case` notation shall
be used for all module members except for class names which shall follow a
`CamelCase` notation.

Functions
---------
Create a module containing the following functions:

    - `factorial`: accepts one integer and prints its factorial (recursive);

    - `my_args`: accepts an arbitrary number of arguments and prints them all;

    - `harmony`: takes an arbitrary number of floats and prints their harmonic
      medium value;

A module shall call its functions with different argumets;

Classes
-------
Create a module containing a class `MyNumberPrinter` which accepts a number in a
constructor and contains the following instance methods:

    - `me`: prints a number itself;

    - `factorial`: prints a factorial of a number;

    - `string`: prints a string concatenated with itself number times;

    - `update`: modifies a number value and prints a new value;

    - `time_in_past`: accepts a one letter string that is either of ``s, m, h,
      d`` and print a time that is a number of seconds, minutes, hours, or days
      in the past since now;

A module shall create several `MyNumberPrinter` instances showing its
functionality.

